Add December 2024 newsletter (#2266)
writethedocs/www: docs/blog/newsletter-december-2024.rst

One of this month's discussions explored a specific challenge of documenting complex subjects when you don't have sufficient domain knowledge: figuring out what's missing. Reviewers often focus on corrections and clarifications but may not mention that you're omitting essential background or conceptual information.

Asking subject matter experts (SMEs) and product managers for a concept-level review can help. You might also ask reviewers to suggest terminology that you can research to improve your own understanding and help you narrow down what to include and exclude. One documentarian even used an introductory textbook for the subject they were documenting, with the idea that any concepts covered in the textbook could reasonably be excluded from the docs.

Another approach is asking "obvious" questions of SMEs, especially about anything that you don't understand. The `curse of knowledge <https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Curse_of_knowledge>`__ may cause SMEs to overestimate the domain knowledge of their users or assume that all users share their background. Prompting SMEs to explain what they assume everyone already knows can help unearth gaps that should be documented.

> Finally, talk to support and technical sales staff to gather valuable information about the user's perspective. Ask what readers need to know to keep them from opening support tickets or to believe that the feature is worth adopting or the product worth buying.

Reviewer: hm, this last sentence seems a little rough-reading. Maybe "...opening support tickets, and what makes the feature worth adopting or the product worth buying."

Author: ```suggestion
Finally, talk to support and technical sales staff to gather valuable information about user perspectives. Ask what readers need to know to keep them from opening support tickets and what could convince them that the feature is worth adopting or the product worth buying.
```

---------------------------------------------------------------
AI in technical writing: Balancing innovation with practicality
---------------------------------------------------------------

The role of AI in technical communication is generating cautious optimism among some documentarians, as seen in recent discussions within the Write the Docs community. While some were skeptical that generative AI tools could ever provide value, others shared examples of how they were already helping.

> AI tools have proved useful for repetitive tasks, such as summarizing product requirement documents, reformatting content into tables, and drafting tutorials for frameworks like Diátaxis. Custom implementations, such as private ChatGPT models, are also enabling advanced use cases, including pattern recognition, content audits, and integrating style guides into editing workflows.

Author: ```suggestion
AI tools have proved useful for repetitive tasks, such as summarizing product requirement documents, reformatting content into tables, and drafting tutorials for frameworks like Diátaxis. Custom implementations, such as private ChatGPT models, are also enabling advanced use cases such as pattern recognition, content audits, and integrating style guides into editing workflows.
```

However, challenges remain. AI-generated content often requires extensive manual editing to meet quality standards, particularly when dealing with proprietary or specialized material. The limitations of AI tools, such as context constraints and compatibility issues with closed systems like MadCap Flare, add extra steps that can diminish productivity gains.

Key insights from the community:

> - AI is most valuable as a tool for “Intelligent Automation,” enhancing existing workflows rather than replacing human expertise.

Author: ```suggestion
- AI is most valuable as a tool for “intelligent automation”: enhancing existing workflows rather than replacing human expertise.
```

- Critical thinking is essential when using AI to evaluate its output and adapt it effectively.

Documentarians may want to experiment with AI, share their experiences, and explore how it fits into their unique workflows. By taking a thoughtful and adaptive approach, technical communicators can harness the potential of AI tools while upholding the high standards of their craft.

---------------------------------------------
Should we optimize for searching or browsing?
---------------------------------------------

> Documentarians may have to determine whether users search or browse for content of interest. What you decide may influence how to focus your resources: SEO and search tools or navigation aids. The resolution to this may depend on your users and what they’re looking for... and also your product interface.

Reviewer: I think there's a space after the ellipsis -- if you meant to include it, never mind.

:og:image: https://www.writethedocs.org/_static/logo-opengraph.png

.. post:: December 09, 2024
  :tags: newsletter

#########################################
Write the Docs Newsletter – December 2024
#########################################

Salutations, documentarians. I hope 2024 has been good to you personally and professionally. As the year ends, it's a good time to make plans for all of the ways we will make the world better, and better documented, in 2025.

> 

Reviewer 2: haha, nice follow up here :+1:

> If you have ideas for how to help others document better, the `Call for Proposals for the Portland 2025 conference <https://www.writethedocs.org/conf/portland/2025/cfp/>`__ is now open. So share your best practices and ideas, and start looking forward to seeing what others can bring as ticket sales will open soon.

Reviewer 2: Maybe throw in the deadline for good measure?

Author: ```suggestion
If you have ideas for how to help others document better, the `Call for Proposals for the Portland 2025 conference <https://www.writethedocs.org/conf/portland/2025/cfp/>`__ is now open. So share your best practices and ideas by January 21, 2025, and start looking forward to seeing what others can bring as ticket sales will open soon.
```

AI tools have proved useful for repetitive tasks, such as summarizing product requirement documents, reformatting content into tables, and drafting tutorials for frameworks like Diátaxis. Custom implementations, such as private ChatGPT models, are also enabling advanced use cases, including pattern recognition, content audits, and integrating style guides into editing workflows.

However, challenges remain. AI-generated content often requires extensive manual editing to meet quality standards, particularly when dealing with proprietary or specialized material. The limitations of AI tools, such as context constraints and compatibility issues with closed systems like MadCap Flare, add extra steps that can diminish productivity gains.

Key insights from the community:

- AI is most valuable as a tool for “Intelligent Automation,” enhancing existing workflows rather than replacing human expertise.
- Critical thinking is essential when using AI to evaluate its output and adapt it effectively.

> Documentarians are encouraged to experiment with AI, share their experiences, and explore how it fits into their unique workflows. By taking a thoughtful and adaptive approach, technical communicators can harness the potential of AI tools while upholding the high standards of their craft.

Reviewer 2: encouraged? by who?

Author: ```suggestion
Documentarians may want to experiment with AI, share their experiences, and explore how it fits into their unique workflows. By taking a thoughtful and adaptive approach, technical communicators can harness the potential of AI tools while upholding the high standards of their craft.
```

* `Search engine optimization (SEO) for documentation <https://www.writethedocs.org/guide/seo/>`_ (WTD page)
* `Information Foraging <https://www.nngroup.com/articles/information-foraging/>`_ (Nielsen Norman Group)

**Navigation- and IA-related resources**

* Many articles available from `Nielsen Norman Group <https://www.nngroup.com/search/?q=information+architecture&searchSubmit=Search>`__
* `Building navigation for your doc site: 5 best practices <https://www.writethedocs.org/videos/na/2017/building-navigation-for-your-doc-site-5-best-practices-tom-johnson/>`__ (WTD video)
* `Complete Beginner’s Guide to Information Architecture <https://uxbooth.com/articles/complete-beginners-guide-to-information-architecture/>`__ (UX Booth)
* `How To Make Sense of Any Mess <https://abbycovert.com/make-sense/>`_ (book by Abby Covert)

----------------
Events coming up
----------------

- 11 Dec, 20:30 CET (Berlin, Germany): `Bears in the Swamp: Write the Docs Berlin Xmas Social <https://www.meetup.com/write-the-docs-berlin/events/304651076/>`__

> - 13 Dec, 08:30 EST (East Coast Virtual,USA): `AI-Powered Chatbots <https://www.meetup.com/write-the-docs-florida/events/303544535/>`__
> - 13 Dec, 08:30 EST (Boston, MA, USA): `AI-Powered Chatbots <https://www.meetup.com/ne-write-the-docs/events/304324020/>`__
> - 17 Dec, 09:30 MST (Boulder/Denver, USA): `December virtual coffee chat <https://www.meetup.com/write-the-docs-boulder-denver/events/304905201/>`__
> - 18 Dec, 19:00 EST (Toronto, Canada): `Write the Docs Toronto  <https://www.meetup.com/write-the-docs-toronto/events/304560659/>`__
> - 9 Jan, 17:30 CST (Austin, USA): `Conferences Are Coming: How to Write a Presentation Proposal That Gets Selected <https://www.meetup.com/writethedocs-atx-meetup/events/304779137/>`__
> - 10 Jan, 08:30 EST (East Coast Virtual,USA): `Write the Docs East Coast Virtual Meetup <https://www.meetup.com/ne-write-the-docs/events/304952794/>`__
> - 15 Jan, 19:00 EST (Toronto, Canada): `Write the Docs Toronto  <https://www.meetup.com/write-the-docs-toronto/events/mnpqgsyhccbtb/>`__
> - 24 Jan, 08:30 EST (East Coast Virtual,USA): `Write the Docs East Coast Virtual Meetup <https://www.meetup.com/ne-write-the-docs/events/vxkgptyhccbgc/>`__
> - 7 Feb, 08:30 EST (East Coast Virtual,USA): `Write the Docs East Coast Virtual Meetup <https://www.meetup.com/ne-write-the-docs/events/vxkgptyhcdbkb/>`__

Author: ```suggestion
- 13 Dec, 08:30 EST (East Coast Virtual, USA): `AI-Powered Chatbots <https://www.meetup.com/write-the-docs-florida/events/303544535/>`__
- 17 Dec, 09:30 MST (Boulder/Denver, USA): `December virtual coffee chat <https://www.meetup.com/write-the-docs-boulder-denver/events/304905201/>`__
- 18 Dec, 19:00 EST (Toronto, Canada): `Write the Docs Toronto  <https://www.meetup.com/write-the-docs-toronto/events/304560659/>`__
- 9 Jan, 17:30 CST (Austin, USA): `Conferences Are Coming: How to Write a Presentation Proposal That Gets Selected <https://www.meetup.com/writethedocs-atx-meetup/events/304779137/>`__
- 10 Jan, 08:30 EST (East Coast Virtual, USA): `Write the Docs East Coast Virtual Meetup <https://www.meetup.com/ne-write-the-docs/events/304952794/>`__
- 15 Jan, 19:00 EST (Toronto, Canada): `Write the Docs Toronto  <https://www.meetup.com/write-the-docs-toronto/events/mnpqgsyhccbtb/>`__
- 24 Jan, 08:30 EST (East Coast Virtual, USA): `Write the Docs East Coast Virtual Meetup <https://www.meetup.com/ne-write-the-docs/events/vxkgptyhccbgc/>`__
- 7 Feb, 08:30 EST (East Coast Virtual, USA): `Write the Docs East Coast Virtual Meetup <https://www.meetup.com/ne-write-the-docs/events/vxkgptyhcdbkb/>`__
```
